[RFC] JSON IDL (#5607)
flyteorg/flyte: rfc/system/5606-json-idl.md

# JSON IDL

**Authors:**

- [@Han-Ru](https://github.com/future-outlier)
- [@Ping-Su](https://github.com/pingsutw)

## 1 Executive Summary

> Use json byte string in protobuf instead of json string to fix int is not supported in protobuf struct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use json byte string in protobuf instead of json string to avoid the issue that integers are not supported in protobuf structs.
```

## 2 Motivation

> In Flytekit, when handling dataclasses, Pydantic base models, and dictionaries, we store data using JSON strings within struct protobuf. This approach causes issues with integers, as protobuf does not support int types, leading to their conversion to floats. This results in performance issues since we need to recursively iterate through all attributes/keys in dataclasses and dictionaries to ensure floats types are converted to int.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Flytekit, when handling dataclasses, Pydantic base models, and dictionaries, we store data using JSON strings within struct protobuf. This approach causes issues with integers, as protobuf does not support int types, leading to their conversion to floats. This results in performance issues since we need to recursively iterate through all attributes/keys in dataclasses and dictionaries to ensure floats types are converted to int. In addition to performance issues, the required code is complicated and error prone.
```

Note: We have more than 10 issues about dict, dataclass and Pydantic.

This feature can solve them all.

## 3 Proposed Implementation
### Flytekit Example
#### Before
```python
@task
def t1() -> dict:
  ...

>   return {"a": 1} -> protobuf Struct {"a": 1.0}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return {"a": 1}  # -> protobuf Struct {"a": 1.0}
```

@task

> def t2(a: <dict>):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
def t2(a: dict):
```

> def t2(a: <dict>):
>   print(a["integer"]) # wrong, will be float point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
def t2(d: dict):
  print(d["a"]) # will be float instead of int
```

```
#### After
```python
Json = "json"

@task

> def t1() -> Annotated[dict, Json]: // Json Byte Strings

Reviewer: Will the user have to use this function signature? As a user I would want to be able to just use ` ->  dict` and not worry about this.

  ...

>   return {"a": 1} -> protobuf Json b'{"a": 1}'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return {"a": 1}  # -> protobuf Json b'{"a": 1}'
```

@task

> def t2(a: <dict>):
>   print(a["integer"]) # wrong

Reviewer: ```suggestion
def t2(a: dict):
  print(a["integer"]) # Now actually an integer
```

Is this what you mean? Or is it still wrong?

Author: For the `wrong` one, it means that we will get a float value but not in value due to the `Struct` protobuf doesn't have `int` field.

```

#### Note
- We use Annotated[dict, Json]  instead of dict to ensure backward compatibility.

>     - This helps us avoid breaking changes.

Reviewer: As a user, I wouldn't want to use `Annotated[dict, Json]` to be honest :/

Reviewer: Do you think it would be possible that we "put some kind of metadata into the Literal" that "tells the type engine to use the new mechanism"?

Reviewer 2: @Future-Outlier is there any way to just make the reading backwards compatible?  if this happens to read a cached value from an upstream execution that written with the old code, fall back to reading the old code (and just log a warning).

I think most people update admin & propeller at the same time.  If they just upgrade flytekit with this new type, it'll fail at registration time right?  if they just upgrade flytekit & admin, but not propeller, it'll fail at launch time?

Author: @fg91 @wild-endeavor 
For flytekit, there's defintely a way to make it backward compatible by adding metadata.

Author: > it'll fail at registration time right?
If we specify with default input, and propeller didn't upgrade (take sandbox as an example)
propeller will crash. (This is definitely a bug in propeller)
```python
from flytekit import task, workflow, ImageSpec

flytekit_hash = "4795f8ef3291e5f90730c0a030025ec6bc189190"
flyteidl_hash = "c1182565d62b4885156454da9d0a100b2facf313"

json_idl = f"git+https://github.com/flyteorg/flyte.git@{flyteidl_hash}#subdirectory=flyteidl"
flytekit = f"git+https://github.com/flyteorg/flytekit.git@{flytekit_hash}"

image = ImageSpec(
    packages=[flytekit, json_idl],
    apt_packages=["git"],
    registry="localhost:30000",
)

@task(container_image=image)
def t2(input: dict) -> dict:
    print(type(input["a"]))
    print(type(input["a"]))
    return input

@workflow
def wf(input: dict={'a': 1, }) -> dict:
    return t2(input=input)
```

<img width="1082" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a908648d-0748-4c1a-b1e1-f2cc6137a3b2">

<img width="1260" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/247fcc1e-bcd3-46be-a64a-1d33a95bb791">

Author: > if they just upgrade flytekit & admin, but not propeller, it'll fail at launch time?
It'll fail before launch time, but I also think it'll fail at launch time too.
The worst part is that the propeller will crash.
Do you think it's ok?
We didn't have good error handling about handling unknown literal types registered to the propeller's compiler should return a good error message response to us, instead out propeller will just crash.

			{Type: &core.LiteralType_Simple{Simple: core.SimpleType_JSON}}
  ...
  return literalType 
}
```
3. Support input and default input
```go
// Literal Input
func ExtractFromLiteral(literal *core.Literal) (interface{}, error) {
    switch literalValue := literal.Value.(type) {
        case *core.Literal_Scalar:
        ...
            case *core.Scalar_Json:
                return scalarValue.Json.Value, nil
    }
}
// Default Input
func MakeDefaultLiteralForType(typ *core.LiteralType) (*core.Literal, error) {
    switch t := typ.GetType().(type) {
	case *core.LiteralType_Simple:
        ...
        case core.SimpleType_JSON:
                        return &core.Literal{
                            Value: &core.Literal_Scalar{
                                Scalar: &core.Scalar{
                                    Value: &core.Scalar_Json{
                                        Json: &core.Json{
                                            Value: []byte("{}"),
                                        },
                                    },
                                },
                            },
                        }, nil
    }
}
```

> ### FlyteKit

Reviewer: Nit:

I feel this detail is not needed in the RFC, the addition of the Json message to flyteidl contains all the information.

Reviewer 2: I think this is not needed yeah, we don't want to draw attention to model files in general.  But could you add an example showing how pyflyte run would work?

#### Pydantic Transformer
##### Before
###### Convert Python Value to Literal
Convert `BaseModel` to a JSON string, and then convert it to a Protobuf `Struct`.
###### Convert Literal to Python Value
Convert Protobuf `Struct` to a JSON string and then convert it to a `BaseModel`.
##### After
###### Convert Python Value to Literal
Convert the Pydantic `BaseModel` to a JSON string, then convert the JSON string to a `dictionary`, and finally, convert it to a `byte string` using msgpack.
###### Convert Literal to Python Value
Convert `byte string` to a `dictionary` using `msgpack`, then convert dictionary to a JSON string, and finally, convert it to Pydantic `BaseModel`.

### FlyteCtl
In Flytectl, we can construct input for the execution, so we have to make sure the values we passed to FlyteAdmin can all be constructed to Literal.

https://github.com/flyteorg/flytectl/blob/131d6a20c7db601ca9156b8d43d243bc88669829/cmd/create/serialization_utils.go#L48 

### FlyteConsole
#### Show input/output on FlyteConsole
We will get node’s input output literal value by FlyteAdmin’s API, and get the json byte string in the literal value.

> We can use MsgPack dumps the json byte string to a dictionary, and shows it to the flyteconsole.

Reviewer: To make sure I understand correctly, the user will still be able to see the content of the dict, ... because flyte console too will deserialize?
If yes, this is quite neat.

Author: Yes, you're right, thank you

#### Construct Input
We should use `msgpack.encode` to encode input value and store it to the literal’s json field.

## 4 Metrics & Dashboards

None

## 5 Drawbacks
There's no breaking changes if we use `Annotated[dict, Json]`, but we need to be very careful about will there be any breaking changes.

> ## 6 Alternatives

Author: Let me clarify the serialization process (deserialization is the reverse):

- Using msgpack:
basemodel -> json string -> dictionary -> msgpack bytes

- Using utf-8:
basemodel -> json string -> json byte string

> ## 6 Alternatives

Author: But the benefit is that if we use `msgpack`, we can have smaller data bytes when uploading to remote storage and downloading from it.
This is really a HUGE benefit and lots of people wants it.

> ## 6 Alternatives

Reviewer 3: UTF-8 and msgpack are not the only possible formats, right? Can we add more color to this? What if of instead dictating msgpack as the serialization format everywhere we added that as an explicit field as part of the new literal type? This way we could have more specialized serialization formats used by plugins in case they want/need to.
